AtChem2 can be installed on Linux/Unix or macOS. A working knowledge of the **unix shell** and its [basic commands](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/reference/) is _required_ to install and use the model.

## Download

There are two versions of AtChem2: the [stable version](https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/releases) and the development version, also known as `master branch` (see the [[model development page|3. Model Development]] for additional information). The source code can be obtained in two ways:

1. with **git**:
   1. Open the terminal. Move to the directory where you want to install AtChem2.
   1. Execute `git clone https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2.git` (if using HTTPS) or `git clone git@github.com:AtChem/AtChem2.git` (if using SSH). This method will download the development version and it is recommended if you want to contribute to the model development.

1. with the **archive file** (`*.tar.gz` or `*.zip`):
   1. Download the archive file of the stable version (https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/releases) or of the development version (https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/archive/master.zip) to the directory where you want to install AtChem2.
   1. Open the terminal. Move to the directory where you downloaded the archive file.
   1. Unpack the archive file (e.g., `tar -zxvf v1.1.tar.gz` or `unzip master.zip`).

Depending on which of these methods you have used, the source code is now in a directory called `AtChem2` or `AtChem2-1.1` or `AtChem2-master`. This directory - which you can rename, if you want to - is the _main directory_ of the model. In the documentation we will assume that the _AtChem2 main directory_ is `$HOME/AtChem2`.

## Requirements

AtChem2 needs the following tools:

* a Fortran compiler: the model compiles with GNU `gfortran` (version 4.8.5) and with Intel `ifort` (version 17.0)
* Python 2.7.x
* cmake
* Ruby 2.0 (optional)

Some or all of these tools may already be present on your system. Use the `which` command to find out (e.g., `which python`, `which cmake`, etc...). Otherwise, check the local documentation or ask the system administrator.

In addition, AtChem2 has the following dependencies:

* the CVODE library
* the openlibm library
* the BLAS and LAPACK libraries
* numdiff (optional)
* FRUIT (optional)

For detailed instructions on the installation and configuration of the dependencies go to: [[1.1 Dependencies]].

## Install

To install AtChem2:

1. Move to the _AtChem2 main directory_ (`cd ~/AtChem2/`). Install the [[dependencies|1.1 Dependencies]] and take note of the name and path of the _dependencies directory_ (in the following instructions, we will assume that the _dependencies directory_ is `~/atchem-libraries/`).

1. Copy the `Makefile` in the `tools/` directory to the _main directory_ (`cp tools/Makefile ./`).

1. From the the _main directory_, open the `Makefile` with a text editor. Set the variables `CVODELIB`, `OPENLIBMDIR`, `FRUITDIR` to the paths of the CVODE, openlibm and FRUIT libraries, as described in the [[dependencies page|1.1 Dependencies]]. Use the full path to the libraries, not the relative path (see issue [#364](https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/issues/364)). For example:
    ```
    CVODELIB     = $(HOME)/atchem-libraries/cvode/lib
    OPENLIBMDIR  = $(HOME)/atchem-libraries/openlibm-0.4.1
    FRUITDIR     = $(HOME)/atchem-libraries/fruit_3.4.3
    ```

1. Execute `./tools/build.sh ./tools/mcm_example.fac`. This command compiles the model and creates an executable (`atchem2`) using the test mechanism file `mcm_example.fac` in the `tools/` directory.

1. Execute `./atchem2`. If the model has been installed correctly, you should see a message similar to this:
    ```
    ------------------
     Final statistics
    ------------------
     No. steps = 546   No. f-s = 584   No. J-s = 912   No. LU-s = 56
     No. nonlinear iterations = 581
     No. nonlinear convergence failures = 0
     No. error test failures = 4
    
     Runtime = 0
     Deallocating memory.
    ```

This means that AtChem2 has completed the test run without errors and is ready to be used. The directory structure of AtChem2 is described [[here|1.2 Model Structure]]. For instructions on how to set up, compile and execute the model go to: [[2. Model Setup and Execution]].

### Note for macOS users

When you first run AtChem2, you may receive an error message like this:

```
dyld: Library not loaded: @rpath/libsundials_cvode.2.dylib
Referenced from: /Users/username/AtChem2/./atchem2
Reason: image not found
Abort trap: 6
```

In this case, type at the terminal prompt the following command (change the path to the CVODE library as appropriate):

```
export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=$(HOME)/atchem-libraries/cvode/lib
```

To make it permanent, add the command to your `~/.bash_profile` file. Advanced users may wish to use instead the accepted answer in [this Stack Overflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/17703510/dyld-library-not-loaded-reason-image-not-loaded) to hardcode `rpath` in this instance for each of `libsundials_cvode.2.dylib`, `libsundials_fvecserial.2.dylib`, `libsundials_vecserial.2.dylib`.

## Tests (optional)

You can run the [[Test Suite|3.1 Test Suite]] to verify that AtChem2 has been installed properly and to make sure that changes to the code do not result in unintended behaviour. This is recommended if you want to contribute to the model development. Note that running the Test Suite requires the optional dependencies to be installed, as explained in the [[dependencies page|1.1 Dependencies]]. 

To run the tests, execute the following commands from the _AtChem2 main directory_:
* `make alltests` runs all the tests (requires **numdiff** and **FRUIT**)
* `make tests` runs only the behaviour tests (requires **numdiff**)
* `make unittests` runs only the unit tests (requires **FRUIT**)

For more information on the Test Suite go to the corresponding [[wiki page|3.1 Test Suite]].
