AtChem2 has a number of dependencies (external tools and libraries): some are required and without them the model cannot be installed or used, others are optional. We suggest to use a single directory for all the dependencies; the _dependencies directory_ can be located anywhere and called as you prefer. In the documentation, we will assume that the _dependencies directory_ is `$HOME/atchem-libraries/`.

Before installing the dependencies, make sure that Fortran, Python, cmake and (optionally) Ruby are installed on your system, as explained in the [[installation page|1. Installation]].

## Required dependencies

### BLAS and LAPACK

BLAS and LAPACK are standard Fortran libraries for linear algebra. They are needed to install and compile the CVODE library (see below). Usually, they are in `/usr/lib/` (e.g., `/usr/lib/libblas/` and `/usr/lib/lapack/`). The location may be different, especially if you are on an HPC system, so check the local documentation or ask the system administrator.

### CVODE

AtChem2 uses the CVODE library, which is part of the [SUNDIALS](https://computation.llnl.gov/projects/sundials) suite, to solve the system of ordinary differential equation (ODE). The current version of CVODE is 2.9.0 (part of SUNDIALS 2.7.0) and can be installed using the `install_cvode.sh` script in the `tools/install/` directory.

1. Move to the _AtChem2 main directory_ (e.g., `cd ~/AtChem2`).

1. Open the installation script (`tools/install/install_cvode.sh`) with a text editor:
   1. If LAPACK and BLAS are not in the default location on your system (see above), change the `LAPACK_LIBS` variable for your architecture (Linux or macOS), as appropriate.
   1. If you are not using the `gcc` compiler (`gfortran` is part of `gcc`), change the line `-DCMAKE_C_COMPILER:FILEPATH=gcc \` accordingly.

1. From the _AtChem2 main directory_, run the installation script (change the path of the _dependencies directory_ as needed):
    ```
    ./tools/install/install_cvode.sh ~/atchem-libraries/
    ```

If the installation is successful, there should be a working CVODE installation at `~/atchem-libraries/cvode/`. The path to the CVODE library is `~/atchem-libraries/cvode/lib/`.

### openlibm

openlibm is a [portable version](http://openlibm.org/) of the [libm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_mathematical_functions) library. Installing this library and linking against it allows reproducible results by ensuring the same implementation of several mathematical functions across platforms.

The current version of openlibm is 0.4.1 and can be installed using the `install_openlibm.sh` script in the `tools/install/` directory.

1. Move to the _AtChem2 main directory_ (e.g., `cd ~/AtChem2`).

1. Run the installation script (change the path of the _dependencies directory_ as needed):
    ```
    ./tools/install/install_openlibm.sh ~/atchem-libraries/
    ```

If the installation is successful, there should be a working openlibm installation at `~/atchem-libraries/openlibm-0.4.1/`.

## Optional dependencies

### numdiff

numdiff is a [program](https://www.nongnu.org/numdiff/) used to compare files containing numerical fields. It is needed only if you want to run the [[Test Suite|3.1 Test Suite]], a series of tests to ensure that the model works properly. Installation of numdiff is recommended if you want to contribute to the development of AtChem2.

Use `which numdiff` to check if the program is already installed on your system. If not, you can install it locally, for example in the _dependencies directory_. Use the script `install_numdiff.sh` (on Linux/Unix) or `install_numdiff_macOS.sh` (on macOS) in the `tools/install/` directory.

1. Move to the _AtChem2 main directory_ (e.g., `cd ~/AtChem2`).

1. Run the installation script (change the path of the _dependencies directory_ as needed):
    ```
    ./tools/install/install_numdiff.sh ~/atchem-libraries/numdiff/
    ```
    or
    ```
    ./tools/install/install_numdiff_macOS.sh ~/atchem-libraries/numdiff/
    ```

1. Move to your `$HOME` directory (`cd ~`). Open the `.bash_profile` file (or the `.profile` file, depending on your configuration) with a text editor. Add the following line at the bottom of the file (change the path of the _dependencies directory_ as needed):
    ```
    PATH=$PATH:$HOME/atchem-libraries/numdiff/bin
    ```

1. Close the terminal.

1. Open the terminal and execute `which numdiff` to check that the program has been installed correctly.

### FRUIT

FRUIT (FORTRAN Unit Test Framework) is a [unit test framework](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing) for Fortran. It requires Ruby 2.0 and is needed only if you want to run the unit tests in the [[Test Suite|3.1 Test Suite]]. Installation of FRUIT is recommended if you want to contribute to the development of AtChem2.

The current version of FRUIT is 3.4.3 and can be installed using the `install_fruit.sh` script in the `tools/install/` directory.

1. Move to the _AtChem2 main directory_ (e.g., `cd ~/AtChem2`).

1. Run the installation script (change the path of the _dependencies directory_ as needed):
    ```
    ./tools/install/install_fruit.sh ~/atchem-libraries/
    ```

If the installation is successful, there should be a working FRUIT installation at `~/atchem-libraries/fruit_3.4.3/`.
