AtChem2 is organized in several directories containing the source code, the compilation files, the chemical mechanism, the model configuration and output files, a number of scripts to install and compile the model, plotting tools in various programming languages, and the test suite files.

The directory structure has changed with the release of **version 1.1** (November 2018). The following table shows the new structure and, for reference, the previous one.

v1.0 | v1.1 | description
-----|------|------------
_main directory_ | _main directory_ | information files (changelog, citation, license, readme) and auxiliary files for the test suite (_N.B._: the `.gcda` and `.gcno` files are generated by the Fortran compiler during the build process).
-- | `mcm/` | data files related to specific versions of the MCM: lists of organic peroxy radicals (RO2), parameters to calculate photolysis rates.
-- | `model/` | model files: chemical mechanism (`.fac`), configuration, input, output.
`modelConfiguration/` | `model/configuration/` | model configuration files and mechanism shared library.
-- | `model/constraints/` | model constraints.
`environmentConstraints/` | `model/constraints/environment` | constrained environment variables.
`environmentConstraints/` | `model/constraints/photolysis` | constrained photolysis rates.
`speciesConstraints/` | `model/constraints/species` | constrained chemical species.
`modelOutput/` | `model/output/` | model output: chemical species, environment variables and photolysis rates, diagnostic variables, formatted production and loss rates of selected species.
`instantaneousRates/` | `model/output/reactionRates` | model output: reaction rates of every reaction in the chemical mechanism.
`obj/` | `obj/` | files generated by the Fortran compiler.
`src/` | `src/` | Fortran source files.
-- | `src/gen/` | Fortran source files generated by the compiler from the chemical mechanism.
`tools/` | `tools/` | Python and shell scripts to build and compile AtChem2, using the chemical mechanism, the configuration and the constraints in the `model/` directory.
`tools/install/` | `tools/install/` | shell scripts to install the dependencies.
-- | `tools/plot/` | scripts to plot the model results (gnuplot, Matlab/Octave, Python, R).
`travis/`| `travis/` | shell scripts to run the test suite.
`travis/tests/`| `travis/tests/` | behaviour tests.
-- | `travis/unit_tests/` | unit tests.

The `model/` directory is the most important for the user: it includes the chemical mechanism, the configuration files, the model constraints and the model output. The `model/` directory can be given any name and it can also be located outside of the _AtChem2 main directory_.

There can be multiple `model/` directories (with different names) in the same location. As long as the correct paths are passed to the compilation and execution scripts, the model will compile and run. This approach gives the user the flexibility to run different versions of the same model or different models at the same time. For more information go to: [[2. Model Setup and Execution]].
