AtChem2 is designed to build and run atmospheric chemistry box-models based upon the Master Chemical Mechanism (MCM, http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCM/). This page explains how to set up, compile and run an atmospheric chemistry box-model with AtChem2. The directory structure of AtChem2 is described [[here|1.2 Model Structure]]. A working knowledge of the **unix shell** and its [basic commands](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/reference/) is _required_ to use the AtChem2 model.

## Configuration

The model requires a chemical mechanism in FACSIMILE format (`.fac`). The **mechanism file** can be downloaded from the MCM website using the [extraction tool](http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCMv3.3.1/extract.htt) or assembled manually. The user can modify the `.fac` file as required with a text editor. For more information on the chemical mechanism go to: [[2.1 Chemical Mechanism]].

The **model configuration** is set via a number of text files located in the `model/configuration/` directory and can be modified with a text editor. Detailed information on the configuration files can be found in the corresponding wiki pages:

* model and solver parameters - see [[2.2 Model Parameters]] and [[2.3 Solver Parameters]].
* environment variables - see [[2.4 Environment Variables]].
* photolysis rates - see [[2.5 Photolysis Rates and JFAC]].
* initial concentrations of chemical species and lists of output variables - see [[2.6 Config Files]].

The model constraints - chemical species, environment variables, photolysis rates - are located in the `model/constraints/` directory. For more information, go to: [[2.7 Constraints]].

## Compilation

The script `build.sh` in the `tools/` directory is used to process the chemical mechanism file (`.fac`) and to compile the model. The script generates one Fortran file (`mechanism-rate-coefficients.f90`) in the `src/gen/` directory and four configuration files (`mechanism.prod`, `mechanism.reac`, `mechanism.ro2`, `mechanism.species`) in the `model/configuration/` directory. Go to the [[chemical mechanism page |2.1 Chemical Mechanism]] for more information.

The script must be run from the _AtChem2 main directory_ and takes four arguments (see the **Important Note 2** at the end of this section):

1. the path to the chemical mechanism file - no default (suggested: `model/`).
1. the path to the directory for the Fortran files generated from the chemical mechanism - default: `src/gen/`.
1. the path to the directory with the configuration files - default: `model/configuration/`.
1. the path to the directory with the MCM data files - default: `mcm/`.

For example, if the `.fac` file is in the `model/` directory:

    ./tools/build.sh model/mechanism.fac src/gen/ model/configuration/ mcm/

An installation of AtChem2 can have multiple `model/` directories, which may correspond to different models or different projects; this allows the user to run more than one model at the same time. In the following example, there are two `model/` directories, each with their own chemical mechanism, configuration, constraints and output:

```
AtChem2/
        | mcm/
        | model_1/
             | configuration/
             | constraints/
             | output/
             | mechanism.fac
        | model_2/
             | configuration/
             | constraints/
             | output/
             | mechanism.fac
        | obj/
        | src/
        | tools/
        | travis/
```

Each model can be built by passing the correct path to the `build.sh` script (see the **Important Note 1** at the end of this section). For example:

    ./tools/build.sh model_1/mechanism.fac src/gen/ model_1/configuration/ mcm/
    ./tools/build.sh model_2/mechanism.fac src/gen/ model_2/configuration/ mcm/

Compilation is required only once for a given `.fac` file. If the user changes the configuration files, there is no need to recompile the model. Likewise, if the constraints files are changed, there is no need to recompile the model. This is because the model configuration and the model constraints are read by the executable at runtime. However, if the user makes changes to the `.fac` file, then the model needs to be recompiled using the  `build.sh` script.

The user may want or need to change the Fortran code (`src/*.f90`), in which case the model needs to be recompiled: if the `.fac` file has also been changed, use the  `build.sh` script, as explained above. Otherwise, if only the Fortran code has been changed, executing `make` from the _main directory_ is enough to recompile the model.

## Execution

The compilation process creates an executable file called `atchem2` in the _main directory_. The executable file takes seven arguments, corresponding to the directories containing the model configuration and output:

1. the path to the directory for the model output - default: `model/output`
1. the path to the directory for the model output reaction rates - default: `model/output/reactionRates`
1. the path to the directory with the configuration files - default: `model/configuration/`.
1. the path to the directory with the MCM data files - default: `mcm/`.
1. the path to the directory with the data files of constrained chemical species - default: `model/constraints/species/`
1. the path to the directory with the data files of constrained environment variables - default: `model/constraints/environment/`
1. the path to the directory with the data files of constrained photolysis rates - default: `model/constraints/photolysis/`

The model can be run by executing the `atchem2` command from the _main directory_, in which case the executable will use the default configuration and output directories. Otherwise, the configuration and output directories need to be specified (see the **Important Note 2** at the end of this section).

For example, if the constraints are in the default directories (or not used), the model can be run by executing:

    ./atchem2 model/output/ model/output/reactionRates/ model/configuration/

In the case of multiple `model/` directories, the directories corresponding to each model need to be passed as arguments to the `atchem2` executable. This allows the user to run two or more models simultaneously. For example:

        ./atchem2 model_1/output/ model_1/output/reactionRates/ model_1/configuration/ mcm/ model_1/constraints/species/ model_1/constraints/environment/ model_1/constraints/photolysis/
        ./atchem2 model_2/output/ model_2/output/reactionRates/ model_2/configuration/ mcm/ model_2/constraints/species/ model_2/constraints/environment/ model_2/constraints/photolysis/

### Important Note 1

As explained above, if the chemical mechanism (`.fac`) is changed, the model needs to be recompiled and therefore a new executable is created. Since there can only be one executable called `atchem2` in the _main directory_, when running multiple models at the same time the user should make sure that the chemical mechanism is the same for all the models and that only their configuration and/or constraints are different. Alternatively, the executable for each model can be manually renamed to ensure that it has been compiled using the desired chemical mechanism. This limitation will be removed in future versions of Atchem2.

### Important Note 2

The arguments need to be passed to the `atchem2` executable in the exact order, as listed above. This means that if - for example - the third argument needs to be specified, it is also necessary to specify the first and the second arguments, even if they have the default values. To avoid mistakes, the user can choose to always specify all the arguments. This behaviour also applies to the `tools/build.sh` script used to compile the model. Future versions of AtChem2 will adopt a simpler command-line interface.

## Output

The model output is saved by default in the directory `model/output/`. The location can be modified by changing the arguments of the `atchem2` executable (see above).

The AtChem2 output files are space-delimited text files, with a header containing the names of the variables:

* values of environment variables and concentrations of chemical species: `environmentVariables.output`, `speciesConcentrations.output`.
* values of photolysis rates and related parameters: `photolysisRates.output`, `photolysisRatesParameters.output`.
* loss and production rates of selected species (see [[2.6 Config Files]]): `lossRates.output`, `productionRates.output`.
* Jacobian matrix (if requested, see [[2.2 Model Parameters]]): `jacobian.output`.
* model diagnostic variables: `finalModelState.output`, `initialConditionsSetting.output`, `mainSolverParameters.output`.

In addition, the reaction rates of all the reactions in the chemical mechanism are saved in the directory `reactionRates/`: one file for each model step, with the filename corresponding to the time in seconds.

## Running on HPC

Atchem2 can be set up to run on a High Performance Computing (HPC) system. Compilation and configuration are the same as for a normal workstation. Typically, a job scheduler is used to allocate computing resources on an HPC system. A **submission script** is therefore needed to submit the AtChem2 models for execution. 

The format and the syntax of the submission script depend on the specific software installed on the HPC system. For instructions on how to prepare a submission script for AtChem2, check the local documentation or ask the HPC system administrator.

An _example_ submission script for the [Portable Batch System (PBS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portable_Batch_System) is shown below:

    #PBS -o atchem2.log
    #PBS -e atchem2_error.log
    #PBS -N base_v1
    #PBS -l walltime=15:00:00
    #PBS -l vmem=10gb
    #PBS -m bea
    #PBS -l nodes=1:ppn=1

    cd ~/AtChem2/
    MODELDIR="base_model_v1"
    ./atchem2 $MODELDIR/model/output/ $MODELDIR/model/output/reactionRates/ $MODELDIR/model/configuration/ $MODELDIR/mcm/ $MODELDIR/model/constraints/species $MODELDIR/model/environment/species $MODELDIR/photolysis/constraints/species
