The **chemical mechanism** is the core element of an atmospheric chemistry box-model. In AtChem2, the mechanism file is written in FACSIMILE format and has the extension `.fac`. The FACSIMILE format is used to describe chemical reactions in the commercial [FACSIMILE Kinetic Modelling Software](http://www.mcpa-software.com/); for historical reasons, the software and the format have been widely used in conjunction with the MCM. The [extraction tool](http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCMv3.3.1/extract.htt) on the MCM website can generate `.fac` files directly in FACSIMILE format.

## FACSIMILE format

Chemical reactions are described in FACSIMILE format using the following notation:

    % k : A + B = C + D ;

where `k` is the rate coefficient, `A` and `B` are the reactants, `C` and `D` are the products. The reaction starts with the `%` character and ends with the `;` character. Comments - enclosed between the characters `*` and `;` - can be added to the mechanism, and will be ignored by the compiler. For example:

    * conversion of A to C with rate coefficient of 1e-4 *;
    % 1E-4 : A = C ;

The mechanism file is processed by the script `tools/build.sh`, as explained in the [[model setup page|2. Model Setup and Execution]]. For the build process to work, the `.fac` file must include four sections delimited by a single comment line, which allows the script to recognize the beginning of each section:
1. Generic rate coefficients
1. Complex rate coefficients
1. Sum of peroxy radicals (see below)
1. Chemical Reactions 

These comment lines must always be present, even though the respective sections can be empty. A minimal `.fac` file looks like this:

    * Generic Rate Coefficients ;

    * Complex reactions ;

    * Peroxy radicals. ;

    RO2 =  ;

    * Reaction definitions. ;

    % k : A + B = C ;

A simple chemical mechanism in FACSIMILE format - with the first step of the atmospheric oxidation of ethanol - is shown below, as an example.

## RO2 sum

The sum of organic peroxy radicals (RO2) is a key component of the Master Chemical Mechanism (see the MCM protocol papers: [Jenkin et al., Atmos. Environ., 31, 81-104, 1997](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1352-2310(96)00105-7) and [Saunders et al., Atmos. Chem. Phys., 3, 161-180, 2003](https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-3-161-2003)). Since AtChem2 is designed primarily to run models based upon the MCM, the `.fac` file must contain a section with the RO2 sum. This section must be introduced by the comment line `* Peroxy radicals. ;` (see above) and has the format:

    RO2 = RO2a + RO2b + RO2c + ... ;

where `RO2a`, `RO2b`, `RO2c`, are the organic peroxy radicals in the chemical mechanism. If there are no organic peroxy radicals in the mechanism (or if the mechanism is not based upon the MCM), the RO2 sum must be left empty, e.g.:

    RO2 = ;

_Important_: HO2 is a peroxy radical, but it is not an organic molecule. Therefore it should NOT be included in the RO2 sum.

The RO2 sum is automatically generated from the mechanism file during the build process, using the list of RO2 extracted from the MCM database. AtChem2 includes the list of all the organic peroxy radicals in version 3.3.1 of the MCM (`mcm/peroxy-radicals_v3.3.1`), which is used by default. Since v1.1, lists of organic peroxy radicals from other versions of the MCM are also included in the `mcm/` directory: see the file `mcm/INFO.md` for instructions on how to use previous versions of the MCM with AtChem2.

## The MCM extraction tool

The MCM website provides a convenient tool which can be used to download the whole MCM, or subsets of it, in FACSIMILE format. After selecting the species of interest in the [MCM browser](http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCMv3.3.1/roots.htt), add them to the _Mark List_, then proceed to the [MCM extraction tool](http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCMv3.3.1/extract.htt) and select _FACSIMILE_ as format. Make sure to tick the boxes:

    [x] Include inorganic reactions?
    [x] Include generic rate coefficients? FACSIMILE, FORTRAN and KPP formats only

then press the _Extract_ button to download the generated `.fac` file into a directory of choice (e.g., `model/`; see the [[model structure page|1.2 Model Structure]]). The mechanism can be modified with a text editor (if necessary) or directly used in AtChem2. More information about the MCM browser and the extractor tool can be found on the [MCM website](http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk).

## The build process

Atchem2 uses a Python script (`tools/mech_converter.py`, automatically called by `tools/build.sh` during the build process) to convert the chemical mechanism into a format that can be read by the Fortran code.

The script generates one Fortran file and four configuration files from the `*.fac` file:

- **mechanism-rate-coefficients.f90** contains the equations, in Fortran code, to calculate the rate coefficients of each reaction. By default, it is saved in `src/gen/`.

- **mechanism.species** contains the list of chemical species in the mechanism. By default, it is saved in `model/configuration/`. The file has no header. The first column is the _ID number_ of each species, the second column is the name of the species:
    ```
    1 O
    2 O3
    3 NO
    4 NO2
    ```

- **mechanism.reac** and **mechanism.prod** contain the reactants and the products (respectively) in each reaction of the mechanism. By default, it is saved in `model/configuration/`. The files have a 1 line header with the number of species and reactions. The first column is the _ID number_ of the reaction, the second column is the _ID number_ of the species (from `mechanism.species`) which are reactants/products in that reaction:
    ```
    29 71 139 numberOfSpecies numberOfReactions numberOfGenericComplex
    1 1
    2 1
    3 1
    3 2
    ```

- **mechanism.ro2** contains the organic peroxy radicals (RO2). By default, it is saved in `model/configuration/`. The file has a comment line header (Fortran style). The first column is the _ID number_ of the peroxy radical (from `mechanism.species`), the second column is the name of the peroxy radical as Fortran comment:
    ```
    ! Note that this file is generated by tools/mech_converter.py based upon the file tools/mcm_example.fac. Any manual edits to this file will be overwritten when calling tools/mech_converter.py
    23 !CH3O2
    26 !C2H5O2
    28 !IC3H7O2
    29 !NC3H7O2
    ```

The locations of the files generated during the build process can be modified by changing the second and the third argument of the script `tools/build.sh`. For more information and detailed instructions go to: [[2. Model Setup and Execution]].


***


## Example mechanism file

    * ------------------------------------------------------------------- *;
    * SIMPLE CHEMICAL MECHANISM                                           *;
    * Chemical mechanism for ethanol - from MCM v3.3.1                    *;
    * ------------------------------------------------------------------- *;
    *;
    * Generic Rate Coefficients ;
    *;
    * Complex reactions ;
    *;
    * Peroxy radicals. ;
    RO2 = HOCH2CH2O2 ;
    *;
    * Reaction definitions. ;
    % 3.0D-12*EXP(20/TEMP)*0.05 : C2H5OH + OH = C2H5O ;
    % 3.0D-12*EXP(20/TEMP)*0.9  : C2H5OH + OH = CH3CHO + HO2 ;
    % 3.0D-12*EXP(20/TEMP)*0.05 : C2H5OH + OH = HOCH2CH2O2 ;
