The **model parameters** are set in the text file `model/configuration/model.parameters`; they control the general setup of the model.

- **number of steps** and **step size**. The duration of the model run is determined by the number of steps and the step size (in seconds). The step size controls the frequency of the model output for the chemical species listed in `outputSpecies.config` (see [[2.6 Config Files]]), and for the environment variables, the photolysis rates, the diagnostic variables.  
For example, a model runtime of 2 hours, with output every 5 minutes, requires 24 steps with a step size of 300 seconds (24x300 = 7200 sec = 2 hours). Possible values for these parameters are shown below, for reference.

- **species interpolation method** and **conditions interpolation method**. Interpolation method used for the constrained chemical species, and for the constrained environment variables and the photolysis rates, respectively (see [[2.7 Constraints]]). Two interpolation methods are currently implemented in AtChem2: piecewise constant (`1`) and piecewise linear (`2`). The default option is _piecewise linear interpolation_.

- **rates output step size**. Frequency (in seconds) of the model output for the production and loss rates of selected species. The species for which this parameter is required are listed in `outputRates.config` (see [[2.6 Config Files]]).

- **model start time**. Start time of the model (in seconds) calculated from midnight of the **day**, **month**, **year** parameters (see below). For example, a start time of 3600 means the model run starts at 1:00 in the morning and a start time of 43200 means the model run starts at midday. The **model stop time** is automatically calculated as: `model start time + (number of steps * step size))`.  
_Important_: if one or more variables are constrained, the interval between the model start time and the model stop time must be equal or shorter than the time interval of the constrained data (see [[2.7 Constraints]]).

- **jacobian output step size**. Frequency of the model output for the Jacobian matrix (in seconds). If the frequency is set to `0` (default option), the Jacobian matrix is not output. Note that the `jacobian.output` file generated by the model can be very large, especially if the chemical mechanism has many reactions and/or the model runtime is long.

- **latitude** and **longitude**. Geographical coordinates (in degrees). By convention, latitude North is positive and latitude South is negative, longitude East is positive and longitude West is negative. Latitude and longitude are used only for the calculation of the Earth-Sun angles, which are needed for the MCM photolysis parameterisation (see [[2.5 Photolysis Rates and JFAC]]).

- **day** and **month** and **year**. Start date of the model simulation. The model time is in seconds since midnight of the start date.

- **reaction rates output step size**. Frequency (in seconds) of the model output for the reaction rates of every reaction in the chemical mechanism. The reaction rates are saved in the directory `model/output/reactionRates/` as one file for each model step, with the name of the file corresponding to the time in seconds. In previous versions of AtChem, this output was called _instantaneous rates_.  
Note that this parameter is different from **rates output step size** (see above), which sets the frequency of a formatted output of reaction rates for selected species of interest. For more information go to: [[2.6 Config Files]].


***


## Runtime reference values

For 1 day at 15 minute intervals:

    96      number of steps
    900     step size

For 2 days at 15 minute intervals:

    192     number of steps
    900     step size

For 2 days at 1 minute intervals:

    2880    number of steps
    60      step size
