The **configuration files** contain the settings for the initial conditions, the constraints and the output of the model. These files complement the configuration settings of the model (in `model.parameters`) and of the solver (in `solver.parameters`), which are in the same directory. For more information go to: [[2.2 Model Parameters]] and [[2.3 Solver Parameters]]).

The configuration files have the extension `.config` and, by default, are in the directory `model/configuration/`. This directory also contains the files generated during the [[build process|2. Model Setup and Execution]] which describe the chemical mechanism (`mechanism.species`, `mechanism.reac`, `mechanism.prod`, `mechanism.ro2`), as explained in the [[chemical mechanism page|2.1 Chemical Mechanism]]. The location of the configuration files can be modified by changing the arguments of the script `tools/build.sh` (see [[2. Model Setup and Execution]]).

The content and the format of the `.config` files are described below. Note that the names of some files have changed with the release of **version 1.1** (November 2018).

## environmentVariables.config

This file contains the settings for the environment variables, which are described in detail in the related [[wiki page|2.4 Environment Variables]]. If an environment variable is constrained, there must be a corresponding data file in `model/constraints/environment/` (see [[2.7 Constraints]]).

## initialConcentrations.config

This file contains the initial concentrations of the chemical species. The first column is the list of initialized species, the second column is the corresponding concentration at `t = 0` (in **molecules cm-3**). For example:

    NO		378473308.14
    NO2		86893908168.9
    O3		1.213e+12
    CH4		4.938e+13

The chemical species not included in this file are automatically initialized to the default value `0`. It is not necessary to initialize the constant and the constrained species (i.e., those listed in `speciesConstant.config` and `speciesConstrained.config`).

The environment variables are set in `environmentVariables.config` (see above) and should not be included in this file.

## outputRates.config

This file (called `productionRatesOutput.config` and `lossRatesOutput.config` in v1.0) lists the chemical species for which detailed production rates and loss rates are required. The file has one column, with one species per line. 

The frequency of this output is controlled by the **rates output step size** parameter in `model.parameters` (see [[2.2 Model Parameters]]). The format of the corresponding output files - `lossRates.output` and `productionRates.output` - is designed to facilitate the analysis of production and destruction rates for selected species of interests (rather than processing the output files in `model/output/reactionRates/`):

```
     time        speciesNumber    speciesName    reactionNumber         rate        reaction

3.600000E+003           8               OH              15         0.000000E+000    O1D=OH+OH
3.600000E+003           8               OH              20         0.000000E+000    HO2+O3=OH
3.600000E+003           9               HO2             16         0.000000E+000    OH+O3=HO2
3.600000E+003           9               HO2             17         0.000000E+000    OH+H2=HO2

7.200000E+003           8               OH              15         0.000000E+000    O1D=OH+OH
7.200000E+003           8               OH              20         0.000000E+000    HO2+O3=OH
7.200000E+003           9               HO2             16         0.000000E+000    OH+O3=HO2
7.200000E+003           9               HO2             17         0.000000E+000    OH+H2=HO2
```

## outputSpecies.config

This file (called `concentrationOutput.config` in v1.0) lists the chemical species for which the model output is required. The current version of AtChem2 limits the number of species that can be output to 100, although the user can modify the Fortran code to increase this number. The file has one column, with one species per line.

The frequency of this output is controlled by the **step size** parameter in `model.parameters` (see [[2.2 Model Parameters]]).

## photolysisConstant.config

This file lists the photolysis rates that are constant. The file has three columns: the first column is the number that identifies the photolysis rate (e.g., `1`), the second column is the value of the photolysis rate in **s-1** (e.g., `1e-5`), the third column is the name of the photolysis rate (e.g., `J1`). The photolysis rates are named according to the [MCM naming convention](http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCMv3.3.1/parameters/photolysis.htt). If no photolysis rate is constant, the file should be left empty.

If one or more photolysis rates is set to a constant value, the others (i.e., those not listed in `photolysisConstants.config`) are set to zero. For more information go to: [[2.5 Photolysis Rates and JFAC]].

## photolysisConstrained.config

This file (called `constrainedPhotoRates.config` in v1.0) lists the photolysis rates that are constrained. The file has one column, with one photolysis rate per line (e.g., `J1`). The photolysis rates are named according to the [MCM naming convention](http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCMv3.3.1/parameters/photolysis.htt). If no photolysis rate is constrained, the file should be left empty. If a photolysis rate is constrained, there must be a corresponding data file in `model/constraints/photolysis/` (see [[2.7 Constraints]]).

The photolysis rates that are not listed in `photolysisConstrained.config` are calculated by AtChem2 using the MCM parametrization and the parameters in `mcm/photolysis-rates_v3.3.1`. Older versions of the MCM photolysis parametrization can be used, as explained in the file `mcm/INFO.md`. For more information go to: [[2.5 Photolysis Rates and JFAC]].

## speciesConstant.config

This file (called `constrainedFixedSpecies.config` in v1.0) lists the chemical species that are constant. The file has two columns: the first column is the list of constant species, the second column is the corresponding concentration (in **molecules cm-3**). If no chemical species is constant, the file should be left empty.

If a chemical species is constant, it does not need to be initialized: the values set in `speciesConstant.config` override those set in `initialConcentrations.config`.

## speciesConstrained.config

This file (called `constrainedSpecies.config` in v1.0) lists the chemical species that are constrained. The file has one column, with one species per line. If no chemical species is constrained, the file should be left empty. If a chemical species is constrained, there must be a corresponding data file in `model/constraints/species/` (see [[2.7 Constraints]]).

If a chemical species constrained, it does not need to be initialized: the values set in `speciesConstrained.config` override those set in `initialConcentrations.config`.
