AtChem2 can be run in two modes:

* unconstrained: all variables are calculated by the model from the initial conditions, set in the [[model configuration files|2.6 Config Files]].
* constrained: one or more variables are constrained, i.e. the solver forces their value to a given value. The variables that are not constrained are calculated by the model.

The constrained values must be provided as separate files for each constrained variable. The format of the constraint files is described below. By default, the files with the constraining data are in `model/constraints/species/` for the chemical species, `model/constraints/environment/` for the environment variables, and `model/constraints/photolysis/` for the photolysis rates. The default directories can be modified by changing the arguments of the `atchem2` executable (see [[2. Model Setup and Execution]]).

## Constrained variables

### Environment variables

All environment variables, except `ROOF`, can be constrained. To do so, set the variable to `CONSTRAINED` in `model/configuration/environmentVariables.config` and create the file with the constraining data. The name of the file must be the same as the name of the variable, e.g. `TEMP` (without extension). See also: [[2.4 Environment Variables]].

### Chemical species

Any chemical species in the chemical mechanism can be constrained. To do so, add the name of the species to `model/configuration/speciesConstrained.config` and create the file with the constraining data. The name of the file must be the same as the name of the chemical species, e.g. `CH3OH` (without extension). See also: [[2.6 Config Files]].

### Photolysis rates

Any of the photolysis rates in the chemical mechanism can be constrained. The photolysis rates are identified as `J<n>`, where `n` is an integer (see [[2.5 Photolysis Rates and JFAC]]). To constrain a photolysis rate add its name (`Jn`) to `model/configuration/photolysisConstrained.config` and create the file with the constraining data. The name of the file must be the same as the name of the photolysis rate, e.g. `J4` (without extension). See also [[2.6 Config Files]].

## Constraint files

The files with the constraining data are text files with two columns separated by spaces. The first column is the time in **seconds**  from midnight of day/month/year (see [[2.2 Model Parameters]]), the second column is the value of the variable in the appropriate unit. For the chemical species the unit is **molecules cm-3** and for the photolysis rates the unit is **s-1**; for the environment variables see the related [[wiki page|2.4 Environment Variables]]. For example:

    -900   73.21
    0      74.393
    900    72.973
    1800   72.63
    2700   72.73
    3600   69.326
    4500   65.822
    5400   63.83
    6300   64.852
    7200   64.739

The time in the first column of a constraint file can be negative. AtChem2 interprets the negative timestamps as "seconds _before_ midnight of day/month/year" (see [[2.2 Model Parameters]]). This can be useful to allow correct interpolation of the variables at the beginning of the model run (see below).

**Important.** The constraints must cover the same amount of time, or preferably more, as the intended model runtime. For example: if the model starts at 42300 seconds and stops at 216000 seconds, the first and the last data points in a constraint file must have a timestamp of 42300 (or lower) and 21600 (or higher), respectively.

## Interpolation

Constraints can be provided at different timescales. Typically, the constraining data come from direct measurements and it is a very common for different instruments to sample at different frequencies. For example, ozone and nitrogen oxides can be measured once every minute, but most organic compounds can be measured only once every hour.

The user can average the constraints so that they are all at the same timescale or can use the data with the original timestamps. Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages in terms of how much pre-processing work is required, and in terms of model accuracy and integration speed. Whether all the constraints have the same timescale or not, the solver interpolates between data points using the interpolation method selected in the `model/configuration/model.parameters` file (see [[2.2 Model Parameters]]). The default interpolation method is piecewise linear, but piecewise constant interpolation is also available.

The photolysis rates and the environment variables are evaluated by the solver when needed - each is interpolated individually, only when constrained. This happens each time the function `mechanism_rates()` is called from `FCVFUN()`, and therefore is controlled by **CVODE** as it completes the integration. In a similar way, the interpolation routine for the chemical species is called once for each of the constrained species in `FCVFUN()`, plus once when setting the initial conditions of each of the constrained species.

As mentioned above, the model start and stop time _must be_ within the time interval of the constrained data to avoid interpolation errors or model crash. If data is not supplied for the full runtime interval, then the _final_ value will be used for all times both _before the first data point_ and _after the last data point_. This behaviour is likely to change in future versions, at least to avoid the situation where the last value is used for all times before the first (see issue [#294](https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/issues/294)).

A warning is printed for all evaluations outside of the supplied time interval. Users may find it useful to supply data that covers a short time _beyond_ the final model time, which may be used by the solver.
