Two versions of Atchem2 are available:

1) the stable version, which is indicated by a version number (e.g., **v1.0**), and can be found [here](https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/releases).

2) the development version: which is indicated by a version number with the suffix `-dev` (e.g., **v1.1-dev**), and can be downloaded from the `master branch` (https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/archive/master.zip) or obtained via **git**.

AtChem2 is under active development, which means that the `master branch` may sometimes be a few steps ahead of the latest stable release. The [[test suite|3.1 Test Suite]] is designed to ensure that changes to the code do not cause unintended behaviour or unexplained differences in the model results, so the development version is usually safe to use, although caution is advised.

The roadmap for the development of Atchem2 can be found [here](https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/projects/1).

Feedback, bug reports, comments and suggestions are welcome. Please check [this page](https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/issues) for a list of known and current issues.

***

If you want to contribute to the model development, the best way is to use **git**. The procedure to contribute code is described below. A basic level of [knowledge of git](https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/) is _required_.

1. Fork the official repository (`AtChem/AtChem2`) to your github account (`username/AtChem2`).

1. Configure git so that `origin` is your fork (`username/AtChem2`) and `upstream` is the official repository (`AtChem/AtChem2`). The output of `git remote -v` should look like this:
    ```
    origin	git@github.com:username/AtChem2.git (fetch)
    origin	git@github.com:username/AtChem2.git (push)
    upstream	git@github.com:AtChem/AtChem2.git (fetch)
    upstream	git@github.com:AtChem/AtChem2.git (push)
    ```

1. Create a new branch in your local repository. Make your edits on the branch, commit and push. Before committing, it is advised to run the [[test suite|3.1 Test Suite]] locally to verify whether the changes could cause any problem.

1. Submit a pull request, together with a brief description of the proposed changes. One of the admins will review the edits and approve them or ask for additional changes, as appropriate.

Contributions can also be submitted via email or via the [issues page](https://github.com/AtChem/AtChem2/issues).

A [[Style Guide|3.2 Style Guide]] is available for code contributions. Note that style and indentation of the code are also checked by the [[test suite|3.1 Test Suite]].
