AtChem2 uses [Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/) for Continuous Integration testing. This programming approach ensures changes to the code do not modify the behaviour and the results of the software in an unintended fashion.

To begin using CI on code modifications, create a Pull Request on github from your own fork to `AtChem/AtChem2` (see [[3. Model Development]] for instructions on how to set up **git**). Once the PR is created, Travis CI will automatically run build, unit and behaviour tests on 2 architectures (linux and OSX). Pull requests should only be merged once the Travis CI has completed with passes on both architectures. This is indicated by the meassage: "All checks have passed".

In order to run the Testsuite on your local machine, call `make alltest` from the _main directory_. This will run each of the 3 classes of test in this order:
* unit tests: checks that small fragments of code generate the expected outputs;
* build test: checks that an example program builds and runs successfully;
* behaviour tests: builds each of a number of test setups in turn, and checks that they generate the expected outputs.

Each of the test classes outputs the results of their tests to the terminal screen. To perform just the unit tests, call `make unittests`. To run just the build and behaviour tests, call `make tests`.

***

The CI tester performs the following on each architecture:
* Install `gfortran`, `cvode`, and `numdiff`
  * linux: use `apt-get` for `gfortran`, `numdiff`, and `liplapack-dev` (a dependency of `cvode`). Install `cvode` from source (`apt-get` could also be used to install `sundials` (including `cvode`), but it doesn't currently hold `cvode 2.9`).
  * OSX: use Homebrew for `gfortran` and `numdiff`. Install `cvode` from source.
* Build and run unit tests. PASS if all unit tests pass.
* Build and run a single example of AtChem2. PASS if this exits with 0.
* Build and run several other examples of AtChem2, using different input files. PASS if no differences from the reference output files are found, otherwise FAIL. Every test must pass to allow the full CI to PASS.

## Adding new unit tests

To add new unit tests, do the following:
 1. Navigate to `travis/unit_tests`. This contains several files with the ending `*_test.f90`. IF the new test to be added fits into an existing test file, edit that file - otherwise, make a new file, but it must follow that pattern of `*_test.f90`. It is suggested that unit tests covering functions from the source file `xFunctions.f90` should be named `x_test.f90`.
 1. The file must contain a module with the same name as the file, i.e. `*_test`. It must `use fruit`, and any other modules as needed.
 1. The module should contain subroutines with the naming scheme `test_*~. These subroutines must take no arguments (and, crucially, not have any brackets for arguments either - `subroutine test_calc` is correct, but `subroutine test_calc()` is wrong).
 1. Each subroutine should call one or more assert functions (usually `assert_equals()`, `assert_not_equals()`, `assert_true()` or `assert_false()`). These assert functions act as the arbiters of pass or failure - each assert must pass for the subroutine to pass, and each subroutine must pass for the unit tests to pass.
 1. The assert functions have the following syntax:
```
call assert_true( a == b , "Test that a and b are equal")
call assert_false( a == b , "Test that a and b are not equal")
call assert_equals( a, b , "Test that a and b are equal")
call assert_not_equals( a, b , "Test that a and b are not equal")
```
 It is useful to use the last argument as a *unique* and *descriptive* test message. If any unit tests fail, then this will be highlighted in the summary, and the message will be printed. Unique and descriptive messages enable faster and easier understanding of which test has failed, and perhaps why.

If these steps are followed, calling `make unittests` is enough to run all the unit tests, including new ones. To check that your new tests have indeed been run and passed, check the output summary - you should see a line associated to each of the `test*` subroutines in each file in the unit test suite.

## Adding new behaviour tests

To add a new behaviour test called '$TESTNAME' to the Testsuite, you should provide the following:

Each input $TESTNAME should have a subdirectory `travis/tests/$TESTNAME/` containing the following files in the following structure (`*` indicates that this file/directory is optional dependent on the configuration used in the test, while `+` indicates that this directory should be populated with the required files for the constraints declared in file in the `model/configuration` directory):

 ```
|- mcm
|  |- photolysis-rates_v3.3.1
|  |- peroxy-radicals_v3.3.1
|- model
|  |- configuration
|  |  |- $TESTNAME.fac
|  |  |- environmentVariables.config
|  |  |- mechanism.reac.cmp
|  |  |- mechanism.prod.cmp
|  |  |- mechanism.species.cmp
|  |  |- mechanism.ro2.cmp
|  |  |- model.parameters
|  |  |- outputSpecies.config
|  |  |- outputRates.config
|  |  |- *photolysisConstant.config
|  |  |- *photolysisConstrained.config
|  |  |- solver.parameters
|  |  |- *speciesConstrained.config
|  |  |- *speciesConstant.config
|  |  |- initialConcentrations.config
|  |  `- a .gitignore file containing 
|  |
|  |       # Ignore everything in this directory
|  |       *
|  |       # Except the following
|  |       !*.config
|  |       !*.parameters
|  |       !.gitignore
|  `- constraints
|     |- *+environment (1)
|     |  `- a .gitignore file containing
|     |		# Ignore nothing in this directory
|     |
|     |         # Except this file
|     |         !.gitignore
|     |
|     |- *+photolysis (1)
|     |  `- a .gitignore file containing
|     | 	        # Ignore nothing in this directory
|     |
|     |         # Except this file
|     |         !.gitignore
|     |
|     `- *+species (1)
|        `- a .gitignore file containing
|               # Ignore nothing in this directory
|
|               # Except this file
|               !.gitignore
|- output
|  |- reactionRates/ (3)
|  |- concentration.output.cmp
|  |- environmentVariables.output.cmp
|  |- errors.output.cmp
|  |- finalModelState.output.cmp
|  |- initialConditionsSetting.output.cmp
|  |- jacobian.output.cmp
|  |- lossRates.output.cmp
|  |- mainSolverParameters.output.cmp
|  |- photolysisRates.output.cmp
|  |- photolysisRatesParameters.output.cmp
|  `- productionRates.output.cmp
|- $TESTNAME.out.cmp (2)
```

Notes on this structure:
  1. if any environment variables (resp. species, photolysis) are to be constrained by data from a file (as set in `model/configuration/environmentVariables.config`, `model/configuration/speciesConstrained.config`, `model/configuration/photolysisConstrained.config`), the subdirectories in `model/constraints/` (`environment/`, `species/`, `photolysis/`) should contain data files with filename equal to the constrained variable name.
  1. the file `$TESTNAME.out.cmp`, should contain a copy of the expected screen output;
  1. the subdirectory `reactionRates`, should contain a `.gitignore` file and a copy of each of the appropriate files normally outputted to `reactionRates`, with each suffixed by `.cmp`. The `.gitignore` file should contain

           \# Ignore everything in this folder
           \*
           \# except files ending in .cmp
           !*.cmp

New tests will be picked up by the Makefile automatically when running `make test`.