In order to make the code more readable, we attempt to use a consistent style of coding. Two scripts, `tools/fix_style.py` and `tools/fix_indent.py`, help with keeping the style of the Fortran code consistent:

* `tools/fix_style.py` edits files in-place to try to be consistent with the style guide (passing two arguments sends the output to the second argument, leaving the input file untouched, and is thus the safer option). This script is by no means infallible.; therefore, when using the script (by invoking `python tools/fix_style.py filename`), it is strongly recommended to have a backup of the file to revert to, in case this script wrongly edits.  
This script is also used in the [[test suite|3.1 Test Suite]] to check a few aspects of the styling. This works by running the script over the source file and outputting to a `.cmp` file: if the copy matches the original file, then the test passes.

* `tools/fix_indent.py` works similarly, but checks and corrects the indentation level of each line of code. This is also used within the [[test suite|3.1 Test Suite]].

***

## Style recommendations

### General principles

* All code should be within a module structure, except the main program. In our case, due to a complicating factor with linking to CVODE, we also place `FCVFUN()` and `FCVJTIMES()` within the main file `atchem.f90`.
* Code is write in free-form Fortran, so source files should end in `.f90`
* Use two spaces to indent blocks
* Comment each procedure with a high-level explanation of what that procedure does.
* Comment at the top of each file with author, date, purpose of code.
* Anything in comments is not touched by the style guide, although common sense rules, and any code within comments should probably follow the rules below.

### Specific recommendations

* All **keywords** are lowercase, e.g. `if then`, `call`, `module`, `integer`, `real`, `only`, `intrinsic`. This also includes `(kind=XX)` and `(len=XX)` statements.
* All **intrinsic** function names are lowercase, e.g. `trim`, 'adjustl', 'adjustr`.
* **Relational operators** should use `>=`, `==` rather than `.GE.`, `.EQ.`, and surrounded by a single space.
* `=` should be surrounded by one space when used as assignment, except in the cases of `(kind=XX)` and `(len=XX)` where no spaces should be used.
* **Mathematical operators** should be surrounded by one space, e.g. `*`, `-`, `+`, `**`.
  * The case of scientific number notation requires no spaces around the `+` or `-`, e.g. `1.5e-9`.
* **Variables** begin with lowercase, while **procedures** (that is, subroutines and functions) begin with uppercase. An exception is **third-party functions**, which should be uppercase. Use either CamelCase or underscores to write multiple-word identifiers.
* **All procedures and modules** should include the 'implicit none' statement.
* All variable **declarations** should include the `::` notation.
* All procedure dummy arguments should include an **intent** statement in their declaration.
* **Brackets**:
  * Opening brackets always have no space before them, except for `read`, `write`, `open`, `close` statements.
  * `call` statements, and the definitions of all procedures should contain **one** space inside the brackets before the first argument and after the last argument, e.g. `call function_name( arg1, arg2 )`, `subroutine subroutine_name( arg1 )`
  * Functions calls, and array indices have **no such space** before the first argument or after the last argument.
